Once around Nova 1670.
This was discovered in the year 1670,
June the 20th by Anthelme. And 5 days
later it was seen by Havalius magnitude
three. So a modest star but easily
visible under good conditions
and it lasted for months before fading
away.
Then in March of the next year, it did
it again. This time brighter. It got all
the way up to magnitude 2.6
and it lasted through until August. You
can see the data on the chart on the
right there. And then there was a third
peak just visible just above the naked
eye magnitude 6 limit again for a few
months. You can see that on the data as
well. And the location for this was in
the small rather obscure constellation
of Vulpcula just below Signis in the
sky. You can see it marked with the red
ring there. And we estimate this was all
happening about 2,280
light years away.
Designation for this is either Nova
Vulpa 1670 for the year or CK vulpecula.
But we don't really understand what it
is. We have this composite photograph on
the right with visible light in blue,
sub millimeter radiation from the alma
array in uh green and then molecular
emission in red giving us this
trriccolor image.
And what we can see is that there's a
compact central object quite bright. And
then we have the classic bipolar
structure which reminds us of the sort
of eruptions you get in many planetary
nebula when giant stars die um and
form white dwarfs. Here's another
photograph composite image really
including um radio images and one
particular color the orange here is from
aluminium fluoride aluminium
monoflloride ALF
but specifically the radioactive isotope
of aluminium aluminium 27 showing that
there is this radioisotope present and
that's indicative of what the cause
might be. The red is just dust and the
blue is the optical data from the Gemini
Observatory there. So, we think this
could be a nova. A nova is where you
have a binary star system inevitably
with one star rather larger than the
other going through the phases of its
existence more rapidly. Big stars live
fast and die young. And so it will enter
the red giant phase, form a planetary
nebula, shed a lot of its mass, some of
which may land on its companion and
leave a white dwarf behind. And then
when the lower mass companion catches up
and enters the giant phase, it loses its
grip somewhat on the uh thin outer
layers that are more distant from the
center of gravity. And the gravity from
the white dwarf companion can now pull
material from it into an accretion disc,
a death spiral in and onto the surface
of the white dwarf.
And if a lot of that material, as is
typical, is hydrogen, then you get a
layer of hydrogen forming on the white
dwarf. And eventually there's enough of
that that gets hot enough to trigger a
burst of nuclear fusion that rips right
around the surface of the white dwarf.
turning all that hydrogen into helium
and creating an enormous outpouring of
energy, a nova. Now, it's not powerful
enough to harm the core of the white
dwarf, usually made of slightly heavier
carbon and oxygen. Maybe other elements
in a particular extreme cases, but
that's the most typical. And um the only
way that uh a white dwarf would explode
as a supernova is if the core gets
involved and gets hot enough for the
carbon particularly to start fusing to
heavier elements in a runaway carbon
flash that usually detonates the entire
star um as a type 1A supernova. But
that's not what's happening here. The
core is immune to this. It's just a
burnoff of the outer layers. quite
bright but nowhere near as bright as the
whole star exploding.
But another possibility is that this was
a collision between two ordinary main
sequence stars. Now I've talked about
V838 Monoserotus in another video and
you can go and check that out if you're
interested. that we do think was
certainly a stellar merger leading to
that uh amazing series of photographs
shown one of at the top there. But we
think that might be what's happening
here. Although the collision could be
not two main sequence stars, but a white
dwarf star and a brown dwarf companion.
And the data from the Almar array in
2018 was used to suggest that this was a
white dwarf consuming a brown dwarf
companion object that had come too
close. Now a brown dwarf is a an object
larger than a gas giant planet like
Jupiter, but not large enough to become
a fullblown
red dwarf star. Um somewhere below about
7 12% of the mass of the sun. They're
not big enough to trigger hydrogen
fusion, but all that hydrogen if it runs
into a white dwarf can certainly get
triggered off and you would get a very
powerful nova event from such an event.
Uh but in 2020 there was an article
suggesting that even that would not be
powerful enough and so there's still
some doubt about this. The 2020 paper
and I love this. It concluded that the
event was an intermediate luminosity
optical transient of unknown cause. So
it was a big bright flash and we don't
know why. Love it.
But the possibilities continue. Others
have suggested that it was a red giant
eating a white dwarf composed entirely
of helium, a so-called helium white
dwarf. Um, and helium white dwarfs are
very rare. We've only ever found two.
Usually white dwarfs end up being uh
composed of carbon and oxygen in the
core as I already said.
So this seems somewhat implausible
because you would have to have a very
rare thing, a helium white dwarf in a
rare stellar collision. So doubly rare
really. Um but the mathematics seem to
support the idea.
Yet more possibilities. A thermal pulse
from a large highmass star. Something
big enough to undergo
stages of fusion beyond the ordinary,
turning helium to carbon to neon to
oxygen, silicon, and so forth. And each
new phase releasing a pulse of energy.
And it's that repeated flashover
that is the explanation for why we saw
those three peaks in the light curve of
the uh ancient eruption from 167071
and 72.
And that does need explaining because
it's harder to see how the other
explanations such as a merger could
produce three pulses.
Though again, if it was a pulse followed
by a reflection of the pulse off the uh
previously ejected nebula, well, look up
V838 Monoserotus in my video for a
further discussion of that.
But one possibility is that this isn't
actually what's happening at all. And
that what we have is the nebula in front
of another object. And in 1981, a point
source was identified magnitude 20.7. So
pretty faint and thought to be the
core object of the nebula.
But it was later shown to be much
further away. So actually just a line of
sight event. And if that object itself
was the thing that was suddenly
brightening and we were just observing
it through the star cloud, seeing the
cloud light up perhaps in phases or
rings as the light takes different
paths. The direct line of sight being
quicker to arrive than the
slightly more offaxis reflected light.
Then this could be a light echo almost a
lensing event only. It's not the bending
of the light. It's more the reflecting
of the light that is actually giving us
this uh weird effect.
But then just uh this year a paper was
published pointing out that in 1408
Chinese astronomers saw a bright object
for about 10 days in the sky. a
so-called guest star, as they would say,
um believing it to be a lost star that
had just wandered into that region of
the sky because it had suddenly been
spotted where no star was recorded on
their star maps. And Hugh Gang, famous
astronomer of China, wrote to his
emperor describing the star and
published a memorial about it. He said
the star was smooth and bright, meaning
it hadn't got sticky out rays coming
from it, and pure yellow in color. Um,
well, the translation of yellow means
anything that wasn't really red. Um, and
yellow was also seen as an apicious
color. So, this was seen as a good omen,
especially without the sharp edges of
any rays coming out of it. So, that
seems to fit with something that wasn't
overly bright. and he wrote about it.
The heavenly vault reveals its blessings
with the virtue stars glittering
brilliance in the middle of the sky. The
silver river, that's the Milky Way,
unfolds its splenders, its luminous
beauty interwoven along the Neando.
And Neando, we will see a star map in a
moment, is a constellation
that was on the Chinese star maps. And
then the splendid omen is truly a sign
of an enlightened era. So that's him
buttering up the emperor hopefully
trying to curry some favor with him. Uh
something that we see a lot in astronomy
in even in western cultures of people
buttering up the king trying to name
asteroids or planets after them etc. But
that's another story. So the Neando
asterism or constellation you can see it
on the Chinese star map there. It's all
joined together with the stick diagrams.
Um in fact uh it's crosses the border of
Signis and um Lyra and the region that
is identified is marked by that yellow
box somewhere in that area. That is
where the Chinese observed it. It's not
been possible to precisely narrow it
down, but it's pretty much centered on
the location of CK Vulpi.
um and Nova uh of 16 80.
But there were a lot of observations
from the Chinese and it's possible and
this is what the paper did to try to
reconstruct from the descriptions not
only the location but the brightness of
the object. And they recorded it
brightening and fading and it seems to
fit. They did this by comparing its
brightness against a standard oil lamp.
So some technology in getting involved
there and it seems to fit the light
curve of a typical nova. So maybe this
was such an event and if it was in the
same place maybe this was a previous
eruption. So, the Nova of 1480 may well
have consumed all the hydrogen on the
surface of the star in a burst of
fusion.
It may then have illuminated a cloud
from a previous eruption, giving us a
light echo like V838 Monoserotus,
and then a second one from a previous
fainter, more diffuse cloud further out,
giving us the third apparent flash. one
year later as the light had traveled an
extra lightyear in taking the sort of
dog leg path rather than coming straight
towards us. And then 200 years later,
what we think of as the helium white
dwarf merging with its red giant partner
could be the star finally colliding,
having burned off all the hydrogen in
the previous nova event. So maybe this
all fits together and that we've finally
got to the bottom of this rather
intriguing cosmic mystery of these two
different nova or guest stars turning
out to be the demise of one particular
star colliding into another after a
series of eruptions and flashes.
But I think there's more to come on
this. I think we will turn more powerful
telescopes to the object over the next
few years and hopefully learn a little
bit more about what's been going on. So,
thanks very much for listening to that
one.